I mean, the responsibility of the auction house is to take every precaution to assure yourself and the buying public that the thing is legitimately acquired, shall we say.
And of course, you take somebody in, somebody comes in and you take them at their word that the thing is found in a flea market.
The frame doesn't exist, the picture doesn't exist.
Skepticism naturally.
Do you ever wonder, did you wonder in this case,
about the provenance at all?
That's outside of your realm of interest?
No, it's certainly not outside the realm of interest.
But in this case, the fact that it was real was so manifestly true that the question of whether it was in a picture frame or behind a wall or in a drawer or whatever, one couldn't determine.
But the fact that it was real
was absolutely apparent, and I mean, it so happens that the Declaration is a piece of printing that's been... Well, sentences have been made with greatest care, and so it takes about 30 seconds.
Well, I mean, it takes a couple of minutes to determine that it couldn't possibly have been any of the recorded copies.
I mean, those are the two questions.
Is it real?
And if it's real, could it be a copy which is only recorded?
which therefore should be in somebody else's ownership.
Once you've established that it's real and it's not one of the recorded copies, then that's really all you need.
I mean, is it possible that, you know, one thing that I've certainly been to any number of institutions since I started my project, and even at Texas, where they have material that they've had for 20 years that's still not catalogued.
I'm not even asking you to speculate, but I think the talk of the street out here, having been to a number of these options, and I've been in these institutions, you know, it's possible that you might have an uncatalogued box lot or something.
Did that ever... Well, I mean, the other factor one can't say much about, but the owner of the Declaration...
was himself so truly surprised by what it was that it didn't occur to any of the people who dealt with it personally that that somehow he was something something that there was something wrong i guess what david said is that you can do what the most an auction house can do is
You know, I mean, give it a good faith shot.
I suppose that's true.
I mean, there comes a point where you have to take somebody at their word unless there's no contradictory evidence to suggest that it's...
It was a fascinating story, though.
Oh, it led to hundreds of phone calls for us.
I suppose they wasted our time, because most of them... Very few stories were a great interest in that one.
I mean, there was a problem with the Columbus letter, but that was another thing, I guess.
A little bit of coffee?
Yeah, I'd like coffee myself as well.
I'm going to have a double espresso, please.
I guess the same for me.
I guess I can handle that.
Good black coffee, American coffee, I guess.
Do you have a sense of, again, what something is worth?
Like, what if the Bay Sam book were to come on the market today?
Well, the Bay Sam book... I don't know offhand.
I mean, clearly it would be something...
of major value, which for books would mean into seven figures rather than just six figures.
But more than that, I don't know what one would say.
I mean, in a way, you might say, well, at one time, the Bay Psalm book held the auction record for a printed book, so you would think that it's comparable to the Gutenberg Bible.
I mean, you try to make a reasoned judgment.
Well, there were 11 Bay Psalm books, and there were, what, 42 Gutenberg Bible books?
Forty-odd, I mean, varying.
You did a census of them.
I think they called them the Doheny.
Yeah, that's right.
I'm going to do it.
In fact, one of the two or three remaining interviews that I'm going to do, I have to do, I think, is with Owen Gingrich at Harvard.
He's obsessed with this.
Yeah, he would be very interesting to talk to.
And I don't know that the Cambridge University Press is publishing his book, The Copernicus Chase, and it's due presently.
Tell me a little bit about the importance of a census.
I mean, is what Owen is doing without knowing too much about it an important thing?
to find out where every copy of a book is possible.
I think it's an interesting process with any book which is definably of major importance and influence.
The question of how it got that way always is important, and it's just one channel of investigation, but it certainly is an interesting one.
I mean, for the Copernicus,
that question is what sort of annotations do the copies have and what sort of ownership to show that they were in the hands of other people thinking about cosmology essentially uh for the gutenberg bible there's still a lot a lot has been done but even more could be done on how the book
was used as a reading copy in monasteries.
Different books will have different points of interest, but I think for anything, or the Shakespeare folios, if one is able to look at essentially all surviving copies, certainly something interesting will come out.
How do you feel about
Of course, with the folio, it's been demonstrated that having more than one copy of the folio, certainly, because there's a worthwhile thing to do.
But generally speaking, a lot of people consider, you know, more than one duplication, more than one copy, gluttony.
I mean, there's a case Roger mentioned to me where Harvard had a second beautiful copy of Silek Citillians, which they sold to Tom Taylor, I guess.
Are you familiar with that case?
Who sold it to him?
I mean, the predecessor, the big name, Jackson.
He would have sold it to Tom Taylor.
I think he did.
No, because Tom Taylor wasn't around in Bill Jackson's.
So it would have been some other book dealer.
Not a dealer.
He sold it to a collector.
Oh, a collector.
Tom.
Oh.
Whose great collection went to Princeton in much the same way that Shitey's might?
Robert Taylor.
Bob Taylor.
Yes.
That's right.
That's a case where it goes counter to the institutionalization thing.
It was where an institution had something that was marvelous and rare and apparently pristine, but they had two and they said a collector will take better care of it
And this was his reasoning, because it was a perfect copy.
I think maybe he was angry, but you get a collection for Harvard, too.
You never know in the wrong way.
And as Roger says, and you must know this on the institutional level, that we are actually reaching the point where we might even have to portion out windows of access to some of these things, because it's like a watercolor.
Yeah, that's true.
Do you have a feeling on that at all?
Well, I think it's true.
In a way, I can speak about that more from the library side, because for an auction house, one is happy to sell important objects and isn't going to do a great deal of
counter-thinking, saying, no, you shouldn't sell something important.
They think that libraries and collectors make those decisions.
But it's true when one sells a duplicate, there always are points of difference between what one keeps and gives up.
And so there's a loss there.
But that has to be balanced against what you gain by disposing of the duplicate.
So I think one can still make a measurement.
If you acquire something else important as a result,
Well, fine.
I don't think one should pretend that a duplicate is simply a disposable object, because it takes a lot of study to determine what one would be losing by giving it up.
But I don't think it's a sacred duty never to dispose of a duplicate.
But you do think, to jump back and say,
But it's a perfectly valid scholarly pursuit, for them to have 79-plus perspectives.
You don't think it's hoarding in any way.
Oh, no, not at all.
No, that was very enterprising, that Folger.
I mean, it turned out to be very enterprising.
I mean, you think he foresaw the Hinman collation?
No, I don't think he did.
I mean, I think it probably was more just an instinct that this is not...
that this is rather a wise thing to be doing, to be buying lots and lots of multiple copies.
Boy, it was something to see, though, I have to say.
Yeah.
This is somebody in there lying flat.
That was something new to me.
I've been pretty good.
I really apologize.
I haven't done anything to come up until that point.
I apologize.
I'm sorry.
What if a person buys something in good faith, and I think that this individual bought this in good faith, that turns out to be stolen?
Not from the individual that he bought it from, certainly not by him.
He bought it in good faith.
Who owns that item?
Who?
the original true owner owns it.
Really?
That doesn't change.
Even if this person paid a million dollars for it, let's say, seven figures.
In this country, it's not a matter of... Yeah, that simply is the law.
In Switzerland, the law is slightly different.
So that's just a question of law.
No, I wouldn't say... Well, did you have any opinions of him?
Looks like he's a pretty ornery character.
I didn't like him very well.
He's a...
He's one of my subjects.
He's kind of Paul Staff of the Texas chapter.
He plans to take over the whole thing.
He was basically the architect of the collection at the University of Texas.
He was the exclusive agent.
People would have good stuff, and they wouldn't buy it unless it went through Feldman.
It's strange how that came to pass.
Do you remember any dealings with Charles Hamilton here in New York?
I mean, I know who he is.
Erika.
Yeah.
What else can I ask?
Do you have any nominations for it?
Who do you think might be the great living collectors?
I think in this country, Bill Scheide would be definitely the... And I would quote you on this, because I do have a chapter just on him.
What makes him a great collector?
Well, he's continued to be serious about his collection for so long, and it's continued as a family tradition for three generations now.
That's a very unusual situation.
And with this acquisition of the 36-line Bible, that is kind of a culmination of something that goes back a hundred years or more within that family.
I think it's essentially a unique situation.
I think he actually has acquired on his own six or seven Gutenberg-related items.
Gutenberg-related items, all of very great importance, very great interest.
I saw his Blickling homilies.
I remember talking to Nicholas Barker in England and how he felt about that being over here.
He said, that is a national disgrace.
Oh, come on now.
Well, that's... No, we're talking about... I don't want to make that as a quote.
We're talking about the investment for an item actually does contribute to its... Oh, yeah.
I mean, it certainly increases the likelihood.
There are no absolute guarantees.
It increases the likelihood of its safe survival.
I'm going to ask you to inscribe this for me.
Oh, thank you.
I have a collection of...
items that is developed.
Did you see the oath of a free man?
Oh yeah, I've seen the oath of a free man, but unofficially and never having to give an opinion.
I mean, I must say it looked pretty good to me.
I thought the great question with that was its provenance or lack of provenance.
But apart from that, as an object, it's
I suppose one has to accept that it's a forgery, but it's a good one.
The only reason Marcus didn't buy it for AAS wasn't that he questioned it, it was the price.
They wanted a million and a half and the AAS was willing to pay 250, which for them would have been a real struggle.
Yeah, but they were willing to do it.
So a lot of people were, I mean Michael, you know Michael Lehman,